Likert Scale: Validation
- This can be validated using a variety of methods:
- Technically out of the scope of the class:
	- Face validity - the extent of which a scale appears to measure what it is intended to measure
		- Are we recording the right thing?
	- Content validity: the extent to which a scale covers all aspects:
		- Is our data sufficient to get everything?

Quantitive Research
- Involves the process of objectively collecting and analyzing numerical data to describe, predict, or control variables of interest
	- The goals are to test casual relationships between variables, make predictions, and generalize results to wider populations
		- We try to make our results work for things outside our context
- Methods: experimental, correlational

Observe and Measure
- Foundation of empirical research
- Observation is the starting point; observations are made:
	- By the apparatus (for quantitative data)
	- By a human observer (may be biased, usually for qualitative data)
- Manual observation
	- Log sheet, notebooks (write it down)
	- Screen capture, photographs, videos, etc.
		- Easier for qualitative data or small data sets
- Automatic data observation
	- Sensors/devices that record quantitative data

Internal Validity
- Definition: The extent to which the effects observed are due to *the test conditions*, such as QWERTY vs DVORAK/other formats
- Statistically, this means:
	- Differences (in the means) are due to the inherent properties of the test conditions
	- Variances are due to the participant differences ("pre-dispositions")
		- How sure these are actually due to participant differences than say, environmental conditions, hardware, test cases
	- Other potential sources of variance are controlled or exist equally and randomly across the test conditions
		- E.g., keyboards are randomized for each participant, swapped so it's not because we're giving one type a mechanical keyboard and the other type a crappy membrane one
		- Or, one computer has a very bad input lag compared to another
- 

External Validity
- Definition: the extent to which results are generalizable to other *people* and other *situations*
- People:
	- The participants are *representative* of the broader intended population of users
		- Do you have to be a pro? Have six fingers? Use a certain device? Be ambidextrous?
- Situations
	- The *test environment* and *experimental procedures* are representative of real-world situations where the interface or technique will be used
		- Can I use this in an office? A phone? While walking?

How do these apply?
- Example:
	- You wish to compare two input devices for remote pointing (e.g.., at a remote projection screen)
	- External validity is improved if the test environment mimics expected usage
	- The test environment should probably...
		- Use a large display or projection screen (not a desktop monitor)
		- Positioning participants at a significant distance from the screen (rather than closeup)
		- Have participants stand (rather than sit)
		- Have an audience to induce anxiety (also feedback from them)
	- Do we compromise internal validity with fixing our external validity?
		- We can control the first three, but not so much the last one... (friends or enemies, or strangers, or how loud they are)
- Example 2:
	- You wish to compare two text entry techniques for mobile devices
	- External validity is improved if the experimental procedure mimics expected usage
	- Test procedure should probably have participants...
		- Enter personalized paragraphs of text (e.g.., a paragraph about a favorite movie)
		- Edit and correct mistakes as they normally would
	- But.... is internal validity compromized?
		- Did the person write a specific length? More or less?
		- Is this something they know? Since they might be thinking as they go, and their typing speed could be faster than they think
		- Do they correct all errors? What about the type of language they use? Can we even measure accuracy? Do they know English (or whatever language) well?
		- Very hard to control many variables, external validity increases but internal validity decreases significantly
- Results: internal and external validity are always contrasting
	- We want both, but improving one usually decreases the other - we need to find something that satisfies everything

Relationships: Circumstantial and Casual
- As noted earlier:
	- Correlational methods -> circumstantial relationships
	- Experimental methods -> casual relationships
- Casual-and-effect conclusions not possible if the independent variable is a *naturally occurring attribute of participants (e.g., gender, personality type, hadnedness, first language, political viewpoint)
- These attributes are legitimate independent variables
- But they cannot be assigned to participants (can't force someone to change gender lol), thus casual relationships are not valid

Grounded Theory:
- You have a broad question, but you use data to help narrow down to what you want - you make more refined questions to target a researchable topic

How to make a good experiment?
- Something that allows us to grab data, and isolate the primary variable from all the noise

Independent/Dependent variable - yeah, you know this.
- Independent variables need to have at least two levels
- The levels, values, or settings for an IV are the test conditions
- Name both the factor (IV) and its levels (test conditions)
- At most two or three independent variables - if you have more, break it down into multiple studies, because otherwise it'll be hard to keep track (especially with multiple-way effects)
	- Note: by level of effects, they mean the number of options (yes/no, A/B/C) for each independent variable

Dependent Variables: what you measure, how you measure
- Also, how do you define them? When do you start a timer? stop it? Count interactions even if they're not fully executed (e.g., tapping a button but not pressing it fully)
- You can measure a ton of them and use stats to figure out which ones contribute to certain variables
- You can make up your own dependent variables as well, but clearly state how they're measured

Control Variables: what needs to stay constant for purposes of reproducibility
- Ensures the independent variables stay independent
	- Experiment example:
		- Independent: background color of keyboard
		- Dependent: entry speed (WPM), accuracy (percent)
		- Control variables: Keyboard/font size, font family, position/posture, bi-manual operation, lighting, noise in environment, length of text, lots of things

I would like to mention that Ahmed did a research paper on Subway Surfer...

Random Variables: something that's intentionally left to the environment in order to improve variability
- Partially because it's hard to control, and partially because it acknowledges conditions that were not controlled (e.g., selecting participants)

Confounding Variable:
- We have a variable that is affected by the independent variable, usually due to logistics
	- E.g., the type of camera when testing between two different setups - the resolution/frame rate of the different devices could affect the results

Experiment Task: 
- For different tasks, provide slightly different questions to avoid using memorization to "cheat"