## More sliders
- Bimanual sliders: use two hands to control a slider, allowing you to click, resize, and scroll with two hands
	- Clicking and resizing could be done in parallel, not scrolling but faster to use two hands
		- Wait, we can do this with a trackpad nowadays
		- Used a dedicated machine with two strips to get two Y-axis positions for one hand
			- Designed that the left strip gives a coarse movement through the document and the right strip gives precise smooth-scrolling control
- Spatial scroller
	- Move a device closer or farther to control zoom
	- Moving the device spatially moves the document proportionally to motion
		- Very natural
		- Good view of the world, inspires optical flow technology where you have a fixed point in the world and have a device follow it
			- Useful for tracking points in 3D
	- Not used often other than in VR
- Segmented scroller
	- A way to control the speed of a slider
		- One divides the control of the slider to control how fast the slider moves (ratio between slider speed to mouse speed)
		- Another one uses acceleration, depending on the mouse acceleration
		- Another one uses a micrometer interface: it controls granularity by moving the mouse vertically (i.e., 2D control)
	- Comparison: all work great for very long lists, not so much for short lists
		- Tested with 10K items
	- Problem: hard to comprehend how fast you have to go from point A to point B
		- People overshoot with mouse acceleration
	- Position and default scrollbar designs are the fastest
		- Scrollbar is 1-1, position is too (but only marginally because of how fast a list is)
	- Depends on both distance and velocity, but velocity is the secondary matter because it may hurt usability
- Tilted scrolling??
	- Use inertial sensors, because well, novel technology
	- Tilt to scroll and select interactions
		- Kinda weird to use...
	- Combine physical control with tilt to do actions (press button to enable tilt, tilt while holding to move, release to select)
	- Issues:
		- Hard to use when moving - good luck tilting when you're in an inertial frame
		- Also, you're tilting the display away from you when you're tilting - are you sure you're stopping on the right position
		- Not precise, especially if you have a shaky hand (speed/angle also an issue)
	- Uses: why not put a GPS, camera, and accelerometer so you can a real-time overlay of an environment (e.g., maps)?
- Eye tracking (???)
	- People like to look at the top of the screen and not manually scrolling down
		- Let's make the page scroll for them as they read
	- No statistically significant difference in reading speed or preference
		- In fact, it was somewhat worse
	- Manual scrolling vs auto scrolling is not much different
		- Maybe useful for cooking instructions so you don't need to touch to scroll
- Touchless Scrolling
	- Samsung tried to solve this issue by saving your hand over a device to not touch a screen - uses the camera
		- Light/ambient sensor can also be used, including IR

## Interactive Elements: Menus
- What is a menu?
	- What is a communication system?
		- Yes, a phone call that makes you press a button is a virtual or auditory menu
	- What does it have?
		- Buttons, radio buttons, check boxes, palettes, and other interactions
	- What does it *not* have?
		- Text entry, selecting objects in graphical editors, selecting cells in spreadsheets
		- Needs to be list based entry, not table based entry
	- Reduce recall time when using a menu - don't need to memorize hot keys, just use a hierarchical method to access something
- How do you make a good menu?
	- Kind or type of menu
		- Linear menus
			- Horizontal or Vertical
		- Hierarchical menus
		- Adaptive/expanding size menus (ones that enlarge the currently selected item, usually an extension of the linear menu)
		- Adaptive menus that put recently used items at the top (usually an extension of the first two)
		- Pie menus (think picker)
		- Marking menus
		- Spin menus (dials for selection)
		- Drop downs (extension on linear menu)
	- Control mechanisms
		- Direct input: mouse, remote (e.g., raycasting)
		- Indirect input: remote (buttons, like directional), keyboard
	- Organization
		- How many items should be there in a menu? (7 $\pm$ 2 thing)
			- 2, 10, 50, 100, 1000?
			- Take advantage of grouping/hierarchical menu
		- Disable certain choices depending on the current selection?
		- How to order/arrange the items?
			- Dividers for different points? Different icon style? Move to a different or sublist?
			- Sort order: alphabetical, most used, groups, hierarchical, even *random?*
				- I guess you could intentionally slow people down..
				- Quizzes/tests to avoid copying, security if you're the US bonds website for inputting passwords...
	- Interaction modale
		- Mouse buttons or keyboards
			- How can you switch between inputs? Which keys/buttons can be used to control?
		- How is the menu opened in the first place?
			- Always visible? In context menu? An option button next to a field? Hybrid? Only on hover?
		- How do you interact?
			- Click? Click and hold? Drag? Toggle?
		- How do they know the interaction starts/is done?
			- Highlight/shadow? Difference between hover and selection? Knowing the action is complete?
		- How to access hierarchical menus?
			- How do you know the action is hierarchical?
				- Arrow? New menu popup?
			- Place mouse over? Wait if using the keyboard? Press right key if opening?
		- How to scroll the menu, *if applicable?*
			- Mouse to scroll? Keep pressing down?
		- Feedback: how do you make the functionality work on different devices?
			- You can't hover with a mouse, and you only have two/three buttons on a mouse vs a keyboard
- Menu systems? (excluding pure hardware input solutions)
	- Popup menus that show on a display and can be controlled by hardware buttons (soft display)
	- Use icons and text displayed
	- Pie menu for faster selection around a cursor
	- List menu shown on the top right
	- Hierarchical menu implemented by changing the items on interaction
	- Icons faster to recognize than text, even if you memorize it you unconsciously read it
- On-screen menus
	- Show a full-screen list to show everything, or split-screen between content and menu
		- Most menus are there not only because they allow you to interact, but to let you know what you can interact with (i.e., a listing of available modes)
## Examples
- Xerox PARC Research Systems
	- Markup (1974): pop-up options now follow the mouse and pop up on request
		- Fitz comes into play: number of items - if your palette follows your cursor, you're reducing movement time
	- Draw (1975): palettes - the menus now stay stuck on the left and show all the time, both as a display and control (know what color/size/mode you're in without drawing it out)
- Smalltalk
	- All menus are popup: press and hold, release over the item - repeat for submenus, and it moves recursively
- WordStar
	- Soft keys: show the options you can do using alt/FN keys, show on the screen at all time at the bottom
		- Adopted by editors like pico/nano
- Star and Viewpoint (1981)
	- Command buttons on the keyboard - dedicated buttons for everything instead of doing shortcuts
	- Menus were therefore very rare, since commands were similar and already existed on the keyboard
		- Specialized buttons for each program would change depending on context/program
	- Fewer capabilities, makes unavailable items disappear
		- Avoided menu items if possible
	- Non-standard keyboard: hard to make universal, which is where IBM took advantage of this to make a standard keyboard layout for QWERTY/DVORAK
	- Touchscreen/keyboard dual usage - possible, but pretty hard to make durable and easy to use
- Star Property Sheets
	- Property Sheets/Dialog Boxes
		- Choose of a set (choice parameters), many of a set (state parameters)
		- Useful for configuration of what options are available when you're doing something like fonts
- Cedar (1982)
	- Tiled window manager
		- No covered windows and no popup menus
		- All fixed windows
- Lisa and Macintosh (1983/4)
	- Menu bar
		- Infinite Y-size (Fitts), easier to hit
	- Disabled items were grayed out
	- Items checked in menu
	- "..." if dialogs (i.e., new window)
	- Showing hotkeys for items
	- Accelerators listed in menu
	- Highlighting hovered/selected item, blinking if you select it
	- Submenus are only one level deep
- Widgets on Lisa/MacOS
	- Buttons: a radio button can be a default (interim feedback)
	- HyperCard tear-off menus (1987)
		- Pop-out menu if you want to take it out, drag to put it back (e.g., Photoshop)
	- Popup menus have combo boxes
- Alternate Reality Kit (1985)
	- 3D look, bevels on the buttons because it psychologically tells you it's a button that can be clicked
	- Simulated with half tones, nowadays shadow is used in implementation
	- Different state of selection shown with gray patterning
- Andrew Toolkit (popup menus)
	- Stacking popups (not good design since you have to unstack for previous options, then restart again - also hides previously selected option)
	- Not pull-out hierarchy
	- Mouse hole to get back to where we were, vs smalltalk to click to repeat
	- Press and release does nothing